
Let us know you agree to cookies
We use cookies to give you the best online experience.

Please let us know if you agree to all of these cookies.

Yes, I agree
No, take me to settings
BBC
Accessibility links
Accessibility Help
Sign in
BBC navigation
News
Sport
Weather
Shop
Earth
Travel
More
Search the BBC
Search
Search the BBC
Capital
Home 
Owning Your Time 
Affording Your Life 
NEW SERIES: 
Level Up
DISCOVER: 
Bright Sparks
 (Credit: Getty Images)
Communication  Managing
Does your boss consider you a 'non-talent'?
Not all employees are created equal, but some managers struggle to motivate their star workers without alienating their incompetent colleagues.

Share on Facebook
Share on Twitter
Share on Reddit
Share on LinkedIn
Share on Google+
Share by Email
16 June 2018
This article originally appeared on The Conversation, and is republished under a Creative Commons licence. The authors are Anand van Zelderen, PhD researcher in work and organisation studies at Katholiek Universiteit of Leuven; and Yannick Griep, assistant professor of industrial and organisational psychology at the University of Calgary in Canada.

Have you ever compared your work performance to a colleague’s? It’s a daily habit for most of us, and can often have a positive impact.

It could be a source of motivation: “Did Tom just receive a promotion? Perhaps if I work a bit harder, I’ll be next!” It could also provide you with a sense of reassurance: “Most of my team members just received a ton of criticism, but my bosses had nothing negative to say about me. I must be doing really well!”

Comparing your performance to that of your colleagues, however, can become a detriment when your performance pales in comparison to that of your peers: “I have been working at this company far longer than Sara, but for some reason she received her second raise and I haven’t even had one.”

Comparing your performance to that of your colleagues, however, can become a detriment when your performance pales in comparison to that of your peers.

Would it be better for your boss to tell you why Sara got another raise and you are still waiting for your first? Or would it be better for your supervisor to keep the situation a secret?

Talent management

We examined the impact of interpersonal comparisons within an organization that uses talent management.

Talent management is a common practice within organizations. It involves the identification of key positions that contribute to the organization’s sustainable competitive advantage. The aim of talent management is to fill these key positions with the most high-performing and high-potential employees.

Considering the competitive climate of organizations, under which organizations frequently succumb and go bankrupt, it should not be surprising that roughly 65% of companies worldwide have a talent management program in place.

Typically, these programs include one to 10% of the company’s employees, who receive extra training and responsibilities, thereby ensuring that the organization stays innovative, profitable, and in the end, survives.

Secrecy or transparency?

But this separation between “talent” and “non-talent” staff raises a lot of controversy. Managers are increasingly concerned about providing equal opportunities to all employees, and fear the negative reactions from those that may be left out of these “elitist” talent programs.

Managers are increasingly concerned about providing equal opportunities to all employees, and fear the negative reactions from those that may be left out of these “elitist” talent programs.

In our research, which includes conversations with talent managers, we have observed that to manage this conflict, supervisors either opt for larger talent pools or keep their talent management practices a secret.

In line with the first approach, many talent managers increase the number of employees identified as “talent” to minimize potentially negative reactions from employees who are actually part of the “non-talent” group. Some talent managers take a different approach and opt to keep their talent practices a complete secret.

Yet while secrecy would allow companies to make “unpopular” decisions and avoid potentially negative reactions from employees, transparency is always portrayed as the more desirable communication strategy.

(Credit: Getty Images)
When it comes to labelling office "talents", some managers choose to keep the pool large as to not offend those who might not be the cream of the crop (Credit: Getty Images)
After all, many researchers have found that a lack of transparency is associated with feelings of nepotism, unjustified business practices and a general lack of trust in management and the organization.

Without engaging in a politico-ethical debate as to whether secrecy regarding talent management is justifiable or not, we asked the question: What is the actual impact of being aware or unaware of one’s own talent status?

Feelings of envy can slow us down

Our research revealed that employees are more likely to develop feelings like envy and reduced self-esteem when they were not selected to be part of the 30% top performers in comparison to when they were excluded from the top 1% of performers in their organization.

A likely explanation is that individuals subconsciously utilize various self-defence mechanisms when confronted with peers that outperform them.

More specifically, for very exclusive talent management programs — those programs where the likelihood to be identified as talent is below the 5% level —employees can more easily convince themselves that one must be an exceptional “genius” in order to be eligible for such a program.

It should come as no surprise that nearly everyone can accept not being a “genius” as long as they believe that their performance is above average.

We also found that feelings of envy were at their absolute lowest and feelings of self-esteem were at their highest when employees were aware of the existence of a talent management program as well as the percentage of employees included in such a program, but they didn’t know whether they were identified as being part of the talent pool themselves.

In other words, ignorance seems to be bliss when it comes to knowing about one’s talent status.

Individuals subconsciously utilize various self-defence mechanisms when confronted with peers that outperform them.

When we combined our findings about the benefits of not knowing whether employees are identified as talent with people’s strong desire for transparency, we reached a conundrum.

Complicating things even further, our research also indicated that nearly 80 percent of employees had a very high desire to be considered a talent. This is despite the fact that talent management typically caters to the top 10 percent, if not less. This provides us with another challenge: How can you openly communicate who is a talent without negatively affecting the “non-talents”?

Make everyone believe they are a talent

Even though it is considered somewhat controversial to do so, we recommend that organizations keep a lid on their talent management practices.

Employees systematically overestimate their own competencies and performance. Making employees aware of their actual (low) performance can result in them retaliating, which will ultimately be harmful to both the company and the employee.

(Credit: Getty Images)
Jealousy can negatively impact employees' productivity, but does that mean bosses should treat "non-talents" the same as "talents"? (Credit: Getty Images)
Instead, we suggest organizations openly communicate about the existence of a talent management program. They can share the percentage of employees considered to be part of the talent pool, without specifying whether individual employees have acquired “talent status.”

Furthermore, previous studies have found that people who believe that they are identified as a talent perform more admirably at their work to prove they are worthy.

We also know that a majority of employees misidentify themselves as a talent within organizations in which talent management practices are kept a secret.

In essence this implies that a majority of the employees might increase their work efforts when their organization introduces a talent management program where the acquired status remains a secret.

Ethical considerations

By now some of you, if not all of you, may be thinking: “Isn’t it callous or even inhumane to leave people in the dark like this?”

But what harm is truly done? If telling the truth hurts so much that it reduces people’s feelings of self-esteem, aren’t we then preserving their well-being and motivation to come to work by keeping some things a secret from them?

And at the same time, organizations can still benefit from all the perks that talent management provides. Without effective talent management, companies hardly stand a fight chance against their competitors, leaving its employees without an income. That is not a more favourable situation either.

We ask you to consider the following: When you are confronted with a peer struggling in some activity, do you tell them they are simply not good enough, or do you tell them a “white lie” to make them feel better?

We all know that confronting people with their (current) lack of competence may result in them losing hope and giving up. Yet with the help of a little encouragement, people will likely continue to invest energy in order to improve.

Through secrecy, the “non-talents” will have a higher level of motivation than they would if they were fully informed. This ignorance actually makes it more likely that they will become more competent over time, and eventually end up being identified as actual talents.

It’s a clear win-win situation.

--

To comment on this story or anything else you have seen on BBC Capital, please head over to our Facebook  page or message us on Twitter.

If you liked this story, sign up for the weekly bbc.com features newsletter called "If You Only Read 6 Things This Week". A handpicked selection of stories from BBC Future, Culture, Capital and Travel, delivered to your inbox every Friday.

Share this article:
Share on Facebook
Share on Twitter
Share on Reddit
Share on LinkedIn
Share on Google+
Share by Email
Follow BBC Capital
Facebook
Twitter
Best of Capital
(Credit: Alamy)
Why we should work less
 (Credit: Getty Images)
The plight of the long-term expat
 (Credit: Piero Zagami)
The avocado toast index
 (Credit: Getty Images)
English speakers are bad communicators
More amazing Capital stories
(Credit: Getty Images)
Is your brain stuck in a rut?
 (Credit: Getty Images)
How whinging can pay off
 (Credit: Getty Images)
How algorithms select World Cup winners
 (Credit: Getty Images)
Why women’s voices are dropping lower
 (Credit: Getty Images)
The famous actors you never see
 Rebel 
How to eliminate boredom from our lives
Around the BBC
 
Future
Is there a humane method of execution?
  
Future
Should we rename women’s body parts?
  
Culture
Sex and the City: A global revolution
  
Culture
He took us on a tour of Hell
  
Travel
The language at the end of the Earth
  
Travel
An iconic Roman dish under fire
Explore the BBC
Home
News
Sport
Weather
Shop
Earth
Travel
Capital
Culture
Autos
Future
TV
Radio
CBBC
CBeebies
Food
iWonder
Bitesize
Music
Arts
Make It Digital
Taster
Nature
Local
Terms of Use
About the BBC
Privacy Policy
Cookies
Accessibility Help
Parental Guidance
Contact the BBC
Get Personalised Newsletters
Advertise with us
Ad choices
Copyright © 2018 BBC. The BBC is not responsible for the content of external sites. Read about our approach to external linking.
